.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2016 deipi.com LLC and contributors. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
.\" of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to
.\" deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the
.\" rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or
.\" sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS
.\" IN THE SOFTWARE.
.\"


.Dd June 16, 2016
.Dt XAPIAND 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xapiand
.Nd "RESTful search engine built on top of Xapian"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl Fl committers Ar committers
.Op Fl Fl replicators Ar replicators
.Op Fl Fl dbpool Ar size
.Op Fl Fl workers Ar threads
.Op Fl Fl use Ar select | poll | kqueue
.Op Fl Fl gid Ar gid
.Op Fl Fl uid Ar uid
.Op Fl L | Fl Fl logfile Ar file
.Op Fl P | Fl Fl pidfile Ar file
.Op Fl Fl rgroup Ar group
.Op Fl Fl raft Ar port
.Op Fl Fl dgroup Ar group
.Op Fl Fl discovery Ar port
.Op Fl Fl xapian Ar port
.Op Fl Fl http Ar port
.Op Fl Fl name Ar node
.Op Fl Fl cluster Ar name
.Op Fl D | Fl Fl database Ar path
.Op Fl Fl solo
.Op Fl Fl chert
.Op Fl Fl verbosity Ar verbosity
.Op Fl v | Fl Fl verbose
.Op Fl d | Fl Fl detach
.Op Fl Fl | Fl Fl ignore_rest
.Op Fl Fl version
.Op Fl h | Fl Fl help
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a Highly Available Distributed RESTful Storage and Search Engine
built for the cloud and with Data Locality. Built on top of Xapian.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl d Ar directives"
.It Fl h , Fl Fl help
Displays usage information and exits.
.It Fl Fl version
Displays version information and exits.
.It Fl Fl , Fl Fl ignore_rest
Ignores the rest of the labeled arguments following this flag.
.It Fl d , Fl Fl detach
detach process. (run in background)
.It Fl v, Fl Fl verbose
Increase verbosity. (accepted multiple times)
.It Fl Fl verbosity
Set verbosity.
.It Fl Fl chert
Prefer Chert databases.
.It Fl Fl solo
Run solo indexer. (no replication or discovery)
.It Fl D , Fl Fl database Ar path
Path to the root of the node.
.It Fl Fl cluster Ar name
Cluster name to join.
.It Fl Fl name Ar node
Node name.
.It Fl Fl http Ar port
TCP HTTP port number to listen on for REST API.
.It Fl Fl xapian Ar port
Xapian binary protocol TCP port number to listen on.
.It Fl Fl discovery Ar port
Discovery UDP port number to listen on.
.It Fl Fl dgroup Ar group
Discovery UDP group name.
.It Fl Fl raft Ar port
Raft UDP port number to listen on.
.It Fl Fl rgroup Ar group
Raft UDP group name.
.It Fl P , Fl Fl pidfile Ar file
Save PID in
Ar file .
.It Fl L , Fl Fl logfile Ar file
Save logs in
Ar file .
.It Fl Fl uid Ar uid
User ID.
.It Fl Fl gid Ar gid
Group ID.
.It Fl Fl use Ar select | poll | kqueue
Connection processing backend.
.It Fl Fl workers Ar threads
Number of worker servers.
.It Fl Fl dbpool Ar size
Maximum number of databases in database pool.
.It Fl Fl replicators Ar replicators
Number of replicators.
.It Fl Fl committers Ar committers
Number of committers.
.Sh FILES
.Sh EXIT STATUS
Exit status is 0 on success, or 1 if the command fails.
.Sh SEE ALSO
Documentation at
.Pa https://github.com/Kronuz/Xapiand/tree/master/docs
.Pp
For questions and technical support, please refer to
.Pa https://github.com/Kronuz/Xapiand
.Sh HISTORY
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An German M. Bravo (Kronuz)  german.mb@deipi.com .
.Pp
.An Jos\*'e Mar\*'ia Valencia Ram\*'irez (JoseMariaVR) chem_valencia@hotmail.com .
.Pp
.An Jos\*'e Madrigal C\*'ardenas (YosefMac) mac.yosef@gmail.com .