===============
Getting Started
===============

Introduction
------------

Xapiand is a Highly Available Distributed RESTful Storage and Search Engine
built for the cloud and with Data Locality. Built on top of Xapian.

This document aims to be a guide to getting up and running with your first
indexing and searching document also a brief introduction to Xapiand.


Installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Xapiand requires Xapian v1.3.2 at least, to get all features to Xapiand provides
you need install Xapian v1.3.3 the Kronuz's patched version
`<https://github.com/Kronuz/xapian>`_, there is a installation guide for this
version in the *compile_from_git.txt* file.

Once installed Xapian, install Xapiand.

Xapiand is builded under c++14 standard to compile you need clang 3.7 or higher.
If you use GCC need 5.1 or higher.

From repository:
""""""""""""""""

::

   cd Xapiand
   mkdir build
   cd build
   cmake -GNinja ..
   ninja
   ninja install


Core concepts
-------------

Databases
^^^^^^^^^
*Xapian documentation*. `Read more
... <https://getting-started-with-xapian.readthedocs.org/en/latest/concepts/indexing/databases.html>`_

Documents
^^^^^^^^^
*Xapian documentation*. `Read more
... <https://getting-started-with-xapian.readthedocs.org/en/latest/concepts/indexing/documents.html>`_

Terms
^^^^^^
*Xapian documentation*. `Read more
... <https://getting-started-with-xapian.readthedocs.org/en/latest/concepts/indexing/terms.html>`_

Term Generator
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
*Xapian documentation*. `Read more
... <https://getting-started-with-xapian.readthedocs.org/en/latest/concepts/indexing/termgenerator.html>`_

Values
^^^^^^^
*Xapian documentation*. `Read more
... <https://getting-started-with-xapian.readthedocs.org/en/latest/concepts/indexing/values.html>`_

JSON document
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
A JSON document is the basic unit of information that can be indexed. This
document is expressed in JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) which is an internet
data interchange format. A JSON document represent any schema information
that the user requiered for storage and searching.

Index
^^^^^^
An index is a collection of documents that have similar characteristics. It is
basically a Xapian database.

Endpoint
^^^^^^^^
It is the URL for some index in the cluster

Node
^^^^^
A node is a single server that is part of a cluster, and participates in
the cluster's indexing and search capacity. The node is identified by a name
which by default is generated by the *namegen* module. You could assign the name
of the node to the start the server with -n *name* option.

Cluster
^^^^^^^
A cluster is a collection of one or more nodes, the cluster holds your entire
data and provies indexing and search capacity across all the nodes. A
cluster is identified by a unique name which is given by the user with the
option --cluster *name* if there is no name given then the node is part of a
default cluster where all nodes without cluster name are joined.

Replicas
^^^^^^^^

TODO: documentation in progress ...

Running Xapiand
---------------
Once installed Xapiand to start a node use de command

::

   xapiand --cluster test


Xapiand by default filtered out the logs, you can control the log level that you
wanna see in the console with the option ``--verbosity=level``, where level can
be set 1 to 3

The verbosity can be set to ``1`` if you want the notice logs that show the
server configuration. Set to ``2`` if you want the see the some events coming up
and set to ``3`` if you want be able to see the debug messages.

This is an example of setting the log level to 2:

::

    xapiand --cluster test --verbosity=2

And you be able to see something like this

::

    ▍[2016-03-16T16:34:58.993068] (===): Xapiand started.
    ▎[2016-03-16T16:34:58.992175] (===):

      __  __           _                 _
      \ \/ /__ _ _ __ (_) __ _ _ __   __| |
       \  // _` | '_ \| |/ _` | '_ \ / _` |
       /  \ (_| | |_) | | (_| | | | | (_| |
      /_/\_\__,_| .__/|_|\__,_|_| |_|\__,_|
                |_|  v3.0.0
       [https://github.com/Kronuz/Xapiand]
              Using Xapian v1.4.0


    ▍[2016-03-16T16:34:58.993463] (===): Changed current working directory to /Users/yosef/Downloads/Xapiand/nodo1
    ▎[2016-03-16T16:34:58.993193] (===): Using Glass databases by default.
    ▍[2016-03-16T16:34:59.000814] (===) [0x61e00000a898]: Node IP address is 10.0.1.14 on interface en0
    ▍[2016-03-16T16:34:59.001407] (===) [0x61e00000a898]: Listening on TCP:8880 (HTTP v1.1), TCP:8890 (xapian v39.0), UDP:58870 (Discovery v1.0), UDP:58880 (Raft v1.0), at pid:39259 ...
    ▍[2016-03-16T16:34:59.003028] (===) [0x61e00000a898]: Started 16 servers, 100 worker threads, 10 replicators, 10 autocommitters
    ▎[2016-03-16T16:34:58.993257] (===): Increased flush threshold to 100000 (it was originally set to 10000).
    ▎[2016-03-16T16:34:59.002971] (===) [0x61e00000a898]: Joining cluster test...
    ▎[2016-03-16T16:34:59.098527] (===) [0x61600000e498]: Advertising as Gaelquiriaw (id: 3EC6F8016154E680)...
    ▎[2016-03-16T16:34:59.453758] (S00) [0x61e00000a898]: Node Gaelquiriaw accepted to the party!
    ▍[2016-03-16T16:34:59.453990] (S00) [0x61e00000a898]: Joined cluster test: It is now online!
    ▎[2016-03-16T16:34:59.455132] (S09) [0x615000008f18]: Node Gaelquiriaw joined the party on ip:10.0.1.14, tcp:8880 (http), tcp:8890 (xapian)! (1)


Note the option ``--cluster`` tell to Xapiand that this node belongs to *test*
cluster. Another thing to note is that the node name it was generated by Xapiand
in this case *Gaelquiriaw*, if you want to specify the name use the option
``--name`` *name*

Xapiand options
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Xapiand provides several command line options

Options
"""""""

==================================  =======================================

``--chert``                         Use chert databases

``--committers <committers>``       Number of committers.

``--cluster <cluster>``             Cluster name to join

``-d,  --detach``                   Detach process. (run in background)

``-D <path>,  --database <path>``   Path to the root of the node

``--dbpool <size>``                 Maximum number of databases in database pool

``--discovery <port>``              Discovery UDP port number to listen on

``--dgroup <group>``                Discovery UDP group name

``--gid <gid>``                     Group ID

``--http <port>``                   TCP HTTP port number to listen on for

``-h,  --help``                     Displays usage information and exits

``-L <file>,  --logfile <file>``    Save logs in <file>

``--name <node>``                   Node name

``-P <file>,  --pidfile <file>``    Save PID in <file>

``--raft <port>``                   Raft UDP port number to listen on

``--rgroup <group>``                Raft UDP group name.

``--replicators <replicators>``     Number of replicators

``--solo``                          Run solo indexer. (no replication or discovery)

``-v,  --verbose``                  Increase verbosity. (accepted multiple times)

``--verbosity <verbosity>``         Set verbosity.

``--version``                       Displays version information and exits

``--workers <threads>``             Number of worker servers

``--xapian <port>``                 Xapian binary protocol TCP port number to listen on

==================================  =======================================


REST API
---------
The REST API is the tool that you can use to interact with your cluster.

Indexing
^^^^^^^^
To create a index only need to send a PUT request with the endpoint:

::

   curl -XPUT 'http://localhost:8880/twitter/tweet/1?pretty=1' -d '
   {
       "user": "Kronuz",
       "postDate": "2015-11-15T13:12:00",
       "message": "Trying out Xapiand, so far so good?"
   }'

In this example the endpoint is ``localhost:8880/twitter/tweet``, since it is a
local test *localhost* is the ip address, the port by default is ``8880`` and
the ``twitter/tweet`` is the index created and is placed in the path working
directory, to change the path directoy, run Xapiand with ``-D`` option. The
index is where the document is stored and ``1`` is the ID for this document,
finally we have a ``pretty=1`` that tell it to print a pretty JSON response.

Xapiand server will send you a HTTP response status code 200 if was successful
with a body JSON, this JSON contains a object that tell you the operation
just performed in this case a indexing with the ID 1 (if you not specify the
commit explicitly Xapiand will do it for you in a few seconds, this is due to
Xapiand tries to be as efficient in disk writes because
of this a single commit can write several updates):

::

  {
      "index":    {
          "_id":  "1",
      }
  }

If you not want to add the ID explicitly, Xapiand it will generate a universally
unique identifier (uuid) used as the ID. To achieve it we need to used POST
rather than a PUT:

::

   curl -XPOST 'http://localhost:8880/twitter/tweet/?pretty=1' -d '
   {
       "user": "Kronuz",
       "postDate": "2015-11-15T13:12:00",
       "message": "Trying out Xapiand, so far so good?"
   }'

Xapiand it will respond as before. Note the id is now a uuid.

::

   {
    "_index": {
        "_id": "9b16e3b4-6e6e-4582-9e86-2fce62a81364",
        "_commit": false
    }
   }

Searching
^^^^^^^^^

Let’s now retrieve that document that we just indexed, the process is very
simple, just send a GET request to the endpoint with a query:

::

    curl -XGET 'http://localhost:8880/twitter/tweet/_search?q=user:Kronuz&pretty=true'

Note the endpoint is still the same, but the ``_search`` replace the ``1`` in
the above request, well this part can be essentially an identifier or an
operation, ``_search`` indicates the operation that we are going to do.

You could think that the tricky part is the query, but is fairly simple too.
``q=user:Kronuz`` is just **Find the documents with the field user equals to
Kronuz**.

And there you have it:

::

   {
       "user": "Kronuz",
       "postDate": "2015-11-15T13:12:00",
       "message":  "Trying out Xapiand, so far so good?",
       "_id":  "1"
   }

Delete document
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
For delete a document just send a DELETE request with the endpoint and the
document id:

::

   curl -XDELETE 'http://localhost:8880/twitter/tweet/1'

So far if we look close the requests, they have a pattern and this is the
request API format to communicate with Xapiand:

::

   curl -X<HTTP method> <ip>:<port>/<index>/<id>|<operation>/?<query>


Modifying/Replacing Documents
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
If you are following the above request reindex the document that just deleted,
now for modify data is enough with reindex the document with the updated field
in this example we modify the field "user" for the document with the id 1:

::

   curl -XPUT 'http://localhost:8880/twitter/tweet/1?pretty=1' -d '
      {
          "user": "YosefMac",
          "postDate": "2015-11-15T13:12:00",
          "message": "New Message with new user for the document 1"
      }'


Note that only are updating fields, but what if you want to remove a field or
add a new one or even both things and update a field value as well, in this
case you need use a patch request, this is how to modify a document without
reindex the document:


First write the patch in a file (tweet_patch) the patch format is in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Patch described in
`RFC 6902 <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6902>`_

::

   [
        { "op": "remove", "path": "/postDate" },
        { "op": "replace", "path": "/user", "value": "Chema" },
        { "op": "add", "path": "/followers", "value": "150" }
   ]

In the above patch we are saying that we want to remove the field "postDate",
replace the field value of "user" for *chema* and add the field "followers" with
a value of *150*

Once the patch is ready, send the patch to Xapiand with a PATCH request

::

    curl -X 'PATCH' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d @/path/to/tweet_patch 'http://127.0.0.1:8880/twitter/tweet/1?pretty'

the Xapiand response show the document updated

::

    {
        "update": {
            "_id": "1"
        }
    }

In order to see the document uptaded retrieve it with a GET request

::

    curl -XGET 'http://localhost:8880/twitter/tweet/1?pretty'

Note this GET is slightly different to the previous, the last time to
retrieve the document we do a search with the command ``_search`` instead of the
``1`` after the index part in the url, also contains a query to match with
the "user"*Kronuz* just for recall this is the previous request

::

    curl -XGET 'http://localhost:8880/twitter/tweet/_search?q=user:Kronuz&pretty=true'

Now you can see the difference, in the request with the ``1`` we are telling to
Xapiand to return the document with the id equals to ``1`` and in other we are
telling to do a **search** in the documents with contains a field *user* with the
value of *Kronuz*

Getting back to the patch businesses, this is the document returned after the
patch

::

    {
        "user": "Chema",
        "message": "Trying out Xapiand, so far so good?",
        "followers": "150",
        "_id": "1"
    }
